% D1L1, LKD - Kamp ’14
% Ceyhun Andac
% 11.08.2014

A Section
=========
-----
yazılım nedir? bilgi sisteminin elle tutulamayan parçası derleme <-\>
tercüme derleyici de yazılım derslenmiş "object" kodda değişiklik mümkün
değil. genelde verilen object kod, satılan lisans bir yazılımın yenisini
yapacağımıza yetersiz yerlerini tamamlasak? -\> bunun için kaynak kod
gereksinimimiz var.

özgür bir yazılımın temel özellikleri: kullanım, çoğaltma, dagıtım,
değiştirme GKL (GPL) genel kamu lisansı: yegane temel önkoşulu GKL olan
bir kod, yenilendikten sonra da kullanıcıyı (her kim ya da kimler
olacaksa) yine GKL ile verilmeli BSD license çift lisanslama gerek GPL
2.0 vr 3.0 için "Çzgür Yazılım ve Linux Günleri" Mart-Nisan
ozgurlisanslar.org.tr

web programming - D1L1 ———————-

writing a program on web ex: project management environment, like
redmine how long does it take? 1 day? 1 month? 1 year?

one have to have knowledge about what he/she will do. redmine has been
coded with rails, I can handle the program I aim to write from there.
how long does it take to learn rails? reading and understand a source
code !rare -\> sometimes it’s easier to write a cde from its basics then
manipulating one written before

"address" enter! in a browser, that’s what someone always do. but then?
-\> DNS (domain name system)

DNS is working with ip addresses. How can someone reach the ip adrress
of a host?:

ping host whois traceroute nslookup dig -x

ping: ISMP packet, how long does it take going from client to server?

a computer does not have an ip address, network cards have ip addresses.
"local host 127.0.0.1" TCP/IP protocol for connecting taking an address
for a computer; you can define it by hand, or "call" DHCP DHCP: "I can
not take an ip by myself, you give it yo me one." access point

"default gateway": nasil gidecegimi bilmedigimde gonderildigim yer.

—.—.—.— max. slots for every part is $256 = 2^8 => 2^{32}$ ilk uc parti
ayni olan ip’ler ayni yerel agdadirlar.

for learning an ip: "ip a", "ifconfig"
